OnePATTERNS, LEARNING, AND CHANGEHow to Take Charge of Your BrainI HAVE WRITTEN MANY BOOKS and talked to many hundreds of thousands of people about hypnosis and NLP, and people are still confused about the similarities and differences between the two. In this book I hope to simplify the issue. My attitude is that at some level or other, everything is hypnosis. People are not simply in or out of trance but are moving from one trance to another. They have their work trances, their relationship trances, their driving trances, their parenting trances, and a whole collection of problem trances.One characteristic of trance is that it is patterned. It's repetitive or habitual. It's also the way we learn.After we're born, we have so much knowledge and expertise to acquire—everything from walking, talking, and feeding ourselves to making decisions about what we want to do with the rest of our lives. Our brains are quick to learn how to automate behavior. Of course, this doesn't mean the brain always learns the "right" behavior to automate; quite often, our brains learn to do things in ways that make us miserable and even sick.We learn by repetition. Something we do enough times gets its own neuronal pathways in the brain. Each neuron learns to connect and fire with the next one down, and the behavior gets set.Sleeping and dreaming are important parts of the learning process.Freud thought of dreams as merely "wish fulfillment"—and maybe for him they were. I regard dreaming as unconscious rehearsal. If I do something I've never done before, I tend to go home, go to sleep, and do it all night long. This is one of the functions of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. REM sleep is the way the unconscious mind processes what it's experienced during the day. It's literally practicing repetitively to pattern the new learning at the neurological level. Quality information and quality material are important to the learning process. If the brain isn't given anything specific to work with, it processes nonsense.If we plan to take control of our learning, we need to understand that it's not only repetition that is important but speed as well. The brain is designed to recognize patterns, and the pattern needs to be presented rapidly enough for the human to be able to perceive the pattern for what it is.Most people have drawn a series of stick figures in the margins of their schoolbooks, then flipped through them to make the figure appear to move. Each page has on it a static image, but the brain will find a pattern—in this case, movement—if the images run rapidly enough.We wouldn't be able to enjoy movies without this process. We'd never be able to understand the story if we only saw one frame a day.So, when we dream, we're running through things to learn, and we're not doing it in real time. "Internal" time differs from clock time in that we can expand or contract it. We learn at extraordinary speed—we can do maybe eight hours worth of work in five minutes before waking up. Sleep researchers support this idea. Subjects who report massively long and complex dreams are found through neural scanning to have been dreaming for only minutes, or even seconds, at a time.Sleep, therefore, is one of the ways we program and reprogram ourselves. If you doubt your own ability to do this, try this out tonight:As you're settling down to go to sleep, look at the clock, and tell yourself several times very firmly that you're going to wake up at a specific time. Set the alarm if you like, but you will wake up a second or two before it goes off.This is something I've encountered in several different cultures. Some people gently bang the pillow with their heads the same number of times as the hour they want to get up.Others tap their heads or their forearms to set their wake-up time. Whichever way it's done, the principle is the same; you somehow "know" you have an internal clock that you can set, using a specific ritual, and no matter how deeply you sleep, it will wake you as effectively as any alarm.If we can program ourselves to do one little thing—such as waking without an alarm—we can program our minds to do many things. We can decide to go to the supermarket. Maybe we need bread, milk, peanut butter, and a couple of cartons of juice. We can drive five miles to the supermarket, walk through a thousand products, maybe talking to someone on our cell phone, and still remember the juice, peanut butter, milk, and bread.Academics sometimes challenge me for something they call "evidence." They want to know the theory behind what I do; they want me to explain it, preferably with the appropriate research references. I've even had people ask for the correct citations for things that I've made up. The way I see it, it's not my job to prove, or even understand, everything about the workings of the mind. I'm not too interested in why something should work. I only want to know how, so I can help people affect and influence whatever they want to changedThe truth is, when we know how something is done, it becomes easy to change. We're highly programmable beings—as unpopular as that idea still is in some quarters. When I started using the term "programming," people became really angry. They said things like, "You're saying we're like machines. We're human beings, not robots."Actually, what I was saying was just the opposite. We're the only machine that can program itself. We are "meta-programmable." We can set deliberately designed, automated programs that work by themselves to take care of boring, mundane tasks, thus freeing up our minds to do other, more interesting and creative, things.At the same time, if we're doing something automatically that we shouldn't be doing—whether overeating, smoking, being afraid of elevators or the outside world, becoming depressed, or coveting our neighbor's spouse—then we can program ourselves to change. That's not being a robot; that's becoming a free spirit.To me the definition of freedom is being able to use your conscious mind to direct your unconscious activity. The unconscious mind is hugely powerful, but it needs directioaJWithout direction, you might end up grasping for straws...and then finding there just aren't any there at all.TwoDOING MORE OF WHATWORKSThe Secret of Effortless ChangeVIRGINIA SATIR,TIIE FAMILY THERAPIST, once said something that has stayed with me for many years. She said: "You know, Richard, most people think the will to survive is the strongest instinct in human beings, but it isn't. The strongest instinct is to keep things familiar."She was right. I've known people willing to kill themselves because they can't face the thought of life without the partner who's died or left them for someone else. Even thinking about how things could be different overwhelms them with fear.There's a reason for this. One of the ways we make models of the world is by generalizing. We survive and prosper by making things familiar, but we also create problems for ourselves.Each day you see new doors, but at a practical level you know each is still just a door. You don't have to figure out what each one is and how to open it. You shake hands with thousands of people, and even though it's a brand-new hand each time, it's not a new event, because somehow you've made it "the same." It's been filed in the compartment in your brain called "shaking hands."But if you go to a country such as Japan where traditions differ, and you stick out your hand and someone bows to you instead, that action completely shatters the pattern. You have to come back to your senses to figure out how to respond in that new situation.But that's the way it's supposed to work. When we're really thinking properly, we make everything familiar until the pattern doesn't function anymore. Then we review it and revise the way we're thinking.Sometimes, though, we make something familiar, and even when it doesn't function anymore, we stick with it, and that's when it starts to make our lives dysfunctional. Instead of redefining the situation and coming up with a new behavior, we keep doing the same thing...only harder!Pop psychologists talk about "the comfort zone" when they should more accurately be calling it "the familiarity zone." People persist in situations that are extremely uncomfortable simply because they're used to them. They're unaware that they have choices, or perhaps the choices they present to themselves—like being alone for the rest of their lives because they'd left an abusive partner—are so terrifying that they refuse to change.For years, psychologists have tortured rats by making them do things like run mazes for bits of cheese. The interesting thing about these experiments is that, when thc-scientists change the position of the cheese, the rats only try the same way three or four times before starting to explore other possible routes. When humans replace the rats, however, they just keep on and on and on, in the hopes that if thcyjust do the same thing often enough they'll get the desired resultApart from proving that rats are smarter than people, these experiments show us that people will often stick to their habits until they're forced to change...or die to avoid that change.All the work I do to accomplish change is based on one important principle. I go in and find out what works and what doesn't work. I slice away what isn't working and replace those areas with new states of consciousness that work better. It's as simple as that.The way I see it, there are three steps to making enduring change:1.	People must become so sick of having the problem that they decide they really want to change.2.	They have to somehow see their problem from a new perspective or in a new light.3.	New and appealing options must be found or created, and pursued.As Virginia also said, if people have a choice, they'll make the best one. The problem is, they often don't have choices.In these cases, hypnosis proves a valuable tool. By definition, we have to alter our state of consciousness to do something new. Hypnosis not only facilitates this but it allows us to minimize or remove the impact of past experiences and to create and install in their place newer, more useful, and more appropriate states. With hypnosis, we can help people discover choices and explore them. And, since time distortion is a characteristic of the phenomenon we call "trance," just as it is of dreaming, we can lead people through choices very rapidly. The learning tool of altered states permits us to familiarize the subject with a new experience in a fraction of the time it would take for them in an ordinary waking state.For this to happen, we need somehow to reduce the impact on the subject of their past negative experiences, to make way for new and more useful ways of experiencing oneself and one's world. The way I work (and the techniques outlined in this book) permits a person who had been held prisoner by his past to make room for change.Some of the patterns in this book lead people to "relive" their past in a new way, while other activities allow people to look at their past, and it just doesn't feel like it quite belongs to them anymore.But, to do any of this really creatively means that we need to understand how people create their representations of their world, as well as how we can help them build new and more resourceful alternatives. Why they behave the way they do is far less important than what they're doing to set up their problem states and how they maintain them. When we know that, even the most impossible problem can have a solution.When I started out, I asked some psychiatrists what were their most difficult clinical problems. Without hesitation, most of them said, "Phobias."This answer is easy to understand. Phobics always have their phobic responses, and they always have them immediately. They never forget.People often describe themselves as "phobic," when in reality they're suffering from some kind of anxiety disorder. Anxious people have to work up to their anxiety attack; phobics don't. They see or even just think elevator and instantly go, "Aaargh!"They never make an exception.Phobias can either be learned, say, from a parent or caregiver, or instantly acquired by some emotionally overwhelming incident. Phobias are a graphic demonstration of the brain's ability to learn something really quickly—often in a single pass.Addressing phobias intrigued me for several reasons. Not only was I ready to respond to the challenge of doing the "impossible," but I knew how useful it could be if people could learn to use the brain's ability to learn quickly and easily to acquire more useful responses. Think of how different someone's life would be if they learned to feel instantly and completely delighted every time they saw their partner—and vice versa.Even though people are often disabled by their phobias, they are always incredibly creative and committed to having them. They need to experience a unique trigger, make complex decisions, and have responses in less time than it takes to describe it. If they fear heights, they have to know precisely what "high" is to have the response.One of the weirdest height phobias I ever encountered was in Michigan. I asked three hundred people if anyone had a really outrageous phobia, and a very distinguished gentleman, aged about fifty, raised his hand and said, "I'm afraid of heights."This didn't seem particularly outrageous, but when I invited him up on to the stage, which was just a couple feet high, he turned pale and said, "No."I reached out my hand and said: "Step up on just one step," but he stepped backward and his knees gave way. To me, that's a real, flaming phobia. I went down in the front of the audience, turned him around, ran him through the Phobia Cure (see Chapter 16), then asked him what he did for a living.He said, "I'm an airline pilot." Something about my reaction or expression prompted him to say, "I know what you're thinking, but once you're in the plane it's not the same."He explained that walking up a flight of stairs was impossible for him. He could only fly planes, such as 747s, that were accessible by a ramp. He told how, when he was in the air force, he had to close his eyes, then be lifted backward into the cockpit. Once he was inside an F-16, he was fine. He couldn't climb a ladder to the plane, but he could fly it at twice the speed of sound and drop napalm across Vietnam without a second thought.His problem had to do with the distinctions he made in his mind of how high "high" was. It had nothing to do with going up; it was all to do with looking down. Once he was high enough up, he was okay. He even told me: "If I get in an elevator and I go up to the eighth or ninth floor I can look out the window, or off the balcony, and I'm fine. But if I get off on the first floor, I've got a problem."If he was in one of those glass elevators, he wouldn't be able to look out. He couldn't cope with walking around and looking out of the first floor, but felt quite safe if his room was on the sixteenth floor. The only thing was, he had to go up to his room with his back to the glass, staring at the wall or the door.How he developed his phobia to such an elegant degree is probably all very complicated, but it doesn't really matter. What's significant is that he made the distinction that being at a certain height meant he could fall—but if it was much higher, he was safe. As soon as he got high enough, the phobia simply stopped functioning.Somewhere in his brain were a starting point and a cutoff point—both very specific, and both functioning entirely outside his conscious awareness. His starting point for a height phobia was the lowest I've ever seen.When he left the air force and became a commercial pilot, he had no problem flying people around in 747s, but he couldn't take a single step up. Of course, I did everything I could to get him fixed as quickly as possible. I don't want crazy people in the cockpit of my plane. I want people who are completely unflappable, with great sensory acuity, so they know exactly where real danger begins and ends.Interestingly, phobias often make a kind of sense. People usually become phobic about something that could actually harm them under certain circumstances. When people come to me and say, "I want to be completely fearless around spiders," or "I don't want to be bothered by heights, no matter how high up I go," I always make them step back and take a realistic look at what they are requesting. In some countries, such as Australia or Africa, having no fear of spiders would be extremely stupid. Some spiders are very poisonous. Likewise, a man with a phobia of heights who told me he wanted to be able to dance fearlessly along the rail of a balcony four floors up needs a reality check.The outcome in curing phobias should always respect the fact that part of the person's brain has actually been working very efficiently to help them avoid danger. The real problem is overreaction. The brain needs a new perspective to be able to change.At the time I began investigating phobias, everyone was arguing over the right approach to psychotherapy. There were dozens, if not hundreds, of different schools of psychology, all fighting over who was right. The interesting part was that none of them was successful. Nobody was actually managing to cure anyone of their problems. To me, it seemed particularly foolish for a group of people who couldn't do something to be arguing about the best way to not do it.These therapists were limited by their own unconscious patterning, which predisposed them to failure. They were all looking at the content of the client's experience—the "why"—to discover what was wrong and find ways to put it right. They were paying too much attention to trying to interpret what their clients were saying, and not noticing what they were doing.I approached it differently. I advertised in the newspaper for people who'd had phobias they'd recovered from and offered to pay them money just to sit down and talk about their experiences. I didn't really expect to get more than a few, but it turned out there were many, many former phobics who were happy to talk about themselves.They all told me more or less the same story. They said things like: "One day, I'd just had enough. I said: 'That's it! No more!'" Then they all said: "I looked at myself and for once I saw how stupid it was to be acting the way I was and I started to laugh...," and then they changed.I noticed that when they made the change, they switched to watching themselves doing the behavior. Those people who lost the phobia were no longer thinking of the experience as if seeing it through their own eyes but were literally recalling it from a different point of view—that of an observer. No matter how scary the phobia had been, it no longer affected them the same way when they took up this detached or "objective" point of view. Inadvertently, they'd discovered how to dissociate from the problem experience.People who still had their phobias, on the other hand, were looking at spiders or planes or elevators as if they were actually there. Because they were representing the thought from a point inside the experience, part of their brains responded as if the experience was actually happening and plunged them even deeper into a state of panic.Even though each of them had differing stories to tell about their particular phobias, the only difference I could see was in the way they were representing the experience of their phobias to themselves. So I had some people with phobias apply what I had learned. I had them "step out" of their bodies and watch their responses as if from across the room. And it worked. They got rid of their phobias really quickly. Their brains simply shifted the way they perceived their situation, and their problems went away.The psychiatrists responded by sending me more and more people with phobias. Some of them were extremely creative and entertaining in the way they had set up their problems. For example, one man had developed a phobia about leaving Huntington, Ohio. He'd be driving along quite happily, then come to the city limits, skid to a halt, and freak out. He hadn't been able to leave town in four and a half years.Since I was always trying to find easier and faster ways of doing things, I had him imagine he was Superman. I got him to float out of his body and fly alongside, watching himself driving his pickup truck. He flew for a couple of miles, then saw himself begin to get nervous, jam on the brakes, and start to panic, .but he flew on!What made the difference was a trick. Inside his mind, not only was he calmly flying along, but he also left town for the first time in years. Now, since part of his brain could perceive that experience as real, I could start to put together the stimulus he had with the response he desired. We sent him out to go for a drive, and he was away for hours. When he came back he was astonishecUHe said he'd driven to the city limits, come to a bridge leading out of Huntington, all the time waiting for his phobia to kick in—but he just drove on.Needless to say, some psychiatrists were deeply skeptical. They kept telling me that change had to be painful and slow, and I said, "Well, that hasn't been my experience. I've changed rapidly, many times, without any trouble."Actually, we all have. Maybe you read something in a book that changed your life in a second. Someone might have said something that instantly changed not only the way you did certain things but the entire quality of the experience you were having. Suddenly, without actually realizing it, something happened that switched off the problem and turned on the solution.It fascinataflme that among all the warring factions, a few therapists scatteredkround the country seemed capable of acting as genuine change agents, and I was driven by curiosity to know how they did it. That was my rule then and remains my rule now: if you want to find out how to do something you can't yet do, find someone who can and ask them. Now we call that process "modeling," and some people have turned it into an unnecessarily long and complicated process.When I first began investigating modeling, I was astonished to find that highly successful people were flattered to be asked how they got that way and were usually happy to talk. The only problem was that they didn't always know how they came to be the way they were.Exercise: Changing Feelings by Dissociation1.	Recall an experience that still causes you sadness or distress. As you remember it, make sure you are reexperiencing it as if it were happening right now. See every thing through your own eyes, feel all the feelings—including the associated emotions—through your own body. Pay particular attention to any sounds; these might include anything that was said by you or any other significant participants in the original scenario. It may also include your own self-talk. Make a mental note of the degree to which this memory still causes you pain.2.	Now pretend or imagine you can step back out of the experience so you can see yourself there, as if on a screen. Push the entire scene away from you, further and further, noticing, as it moves into the distance, how the colors begin to leach away and the detail diminishes. Push it as far away as you need to push it to notice a distinct difference in the way you feel about the events.Note: Unless you particularly wish to have the discomfort back, you can leave the experience where it is—or even spin it away into space and have it explode into the sun.ThreeREPRESENTING "REALITY"The Birth of Personal FreedomNEURO-LJNGUISTIC PROGRAMMING WAS born many years ago, partly out of the events one night in a hypnosis seminar. The people there were achieving deep hypnotic states and demonstrating dramatic hypnotic phenomena.Some of them were doing things like limited vision and positive hallucinations; others were controlling their blood pressure. One young girl even speeded up the way her eyes worked, but not the rest of her, so she could see the world in slow motion. Without any training at all, she was able to run rings around a martial artist friend of mine. From her point of view, everything was slowed all the way down. To the observer, she was moving twice as fast as the other guy.Of course, different people were able to achieve different levels of competence, and that set me thinking.Already, those psychologists studying hypnosis had decided there was such a thing as "hypnotizability" that could be measured—meaning that one person could be more or less hypnotizable than another.I didn't really believe that. I wasn't impressed with the idea of a hypnotizability scale. I kept asking, "Has anybody got one? Has anyone even seen one?"What the research really told me, though, was that if you use the same input with some people, they will respond differently than others. In the case of hypnosis, some people go deeper, others not. To me, the analogy was simply that if you keep punching a group of research subjects at the same height, you'll hit some in the head and hit the really tall ones in the knee. The whole thing begged the question: What was one person doing with his brain that the other wasn't? It seemed to me that these psychologists were really measuring not hypnotizability, but their own incompetence.Some philosophers and scientists have suggested that the world we perceive ourselves in is only a representation of reality, whatever that is. Hans Vaihinger, Alfred Korzybski, and Gregory Bate-son all made the same observation. They all discussed variations on the theme of "our experience of reality is not the same as reality itself." Some very old cultures came to the same conclusion. They realized thousands of years ago that what was outside the mind was not the same as what was inside the mind. Part of their way of dealing with it was to meditate for years to become enlightened and dissolve the "illusion."But the problem remained for the rest of us. Even if we accepted that our experience was constructed in our minds, what then? What could we do with that knowledge? What difference would it make?In volume one of The Structure of Magic, I wrote: "We as human beings do not act directly on the world. Each of us creates a representation of the world in which we live—that is we create a map or model which we use to generate our behavior. Our representation of the world determines to a large degree what our experience of the world will be, how we will perceivc-the world, what choices we will see available to us as we live in the world."My point was that those people in that workshop who could create positive or negative hallucinations, or become selectively amnesiac, or anesthetize their arms, were representing their world differently from those who could not do those things. They changed their way of looking at things; they changed their beliefs. The intriguing thing is that, in some cases, not only did their subjective experience change with the suggestion, but their physiology did, too.Hypnosis, therefore, was central to the development of NLP because it allowed us to explore altered states. We could push boundaries with it, because it was a tool that allowed us to begin to learn what was possible. Once we saw some of the things that were possible, we could begin to look at how they happened and what we needed to do to replicate the outcomes. In this sense, NLP may be thought of as the underlying "structure" of hypnosis.It wasn't possible to turn to psychology for help, because not only were most of the "experts" fighting with each other to decide whose theory was correct, they were also focused only on why people became ill or stuck, or how they came to fail.I once spent a whole winter house-sitting for a psychiatrist friend, and out of sheer boredom-H read every book he had. It was a fascinating experience. The hundreds of texts by all these important doctors and professors could tell you everything you needed to know about how people got sick or stuck—but not one of them had even the glimmer of an idea of how to help them get better. It didn't even seem to occur to them that it might be a useful direction to follow.That was a question I found myself asking again and again. How do people get better? Some of them do get better, sometimes with the help of doctors or psychologists. Others just get better all by themselves.But my interest went beyond that. I wanted to know how people achieved their goals and what made some of them exceptional in their field. I wanted to know how some people achieved excellence.A few therapists at the time were getting far better results than those of their colleagues. They lived and practiced in different parts of the country; their methods were different; and they didn't know anything about each other or the way they worked. But those who knew them and saw their work described their results as magical—and they were, compared with the results of most of their peers.Their followers praised their talent or genius or intuition, as if that explained their abilities, but nobody at the time really understood how they came to be this way, least of all the therapists themselves.As a scientist and a mathematician, I knew there had to be a structure, and I wanted to know what that structure was. I knew that, if it could be identified, it should be possible to replicate it and even teach it to other people. Everybody could become magicians in their own right.I spent some time with John Grinder studying these therapeutic wizards very closely. Initially, we focused on family therapist Virginia Satir, Gestalt therapist Fritz Perls, and Milton Erickson, the grandfather of modern hypnotherapy. We watched them at work, and instead of getting caught up in the content of what they were doing, we looked at the syntax of what they were saying and doing. As soon as we looked at it that way, the patterns popped out everywhere—in the questions they asked, the words they used, the gestures they made, in the tonality and rate with which they spoke. We started to notice that, even though they were all very different personalities, they shared many characteristics.The interesting thing was that they all acted intuitively. They all had their own maps or models of therapy; there were similarities and there were differences. Often they had no idea at all why something they had done had been successful, but all shared a belief that the client's model of the world could be changed. Regardless of what they did or thought they were doing, each believed in helping to expand and enrich the clients' subjective experience.Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) takes the position that no two people share precisely the same experiences. The map or model they create to make sense of and navigate around the world is partially based on these experiences and the distinctive ways in which each processes them. Therefore, each person's model varies to some degree from the model created by every other person. We live in different realities, some richer, and some very much poorer, than others.This fact alone doesn't always cause problems. We have something called consensual, or shared, reality, which means we all, more or less, agree to operate according to the same hallucinations—and this is a useful thing. We need to have certain rules by which we all function. We need to agree on what is up and what is down. We need to know the difference between left and right—something I discovered for myself the first time I visited the United Kingdom and found out that they drive on the other side of the road from Americans. Stepping off the sidewalk and looking only one way is not a good idea if you're still operating according to a map that applies to somewhere else.Now, if a map or a model adequately represents the reality it is describing, the person who has created it is likely to be functioning adequately in her or his world. But experience shows us that most people who come to us in pain feel blocked and limited and without any sense of options or choices. In other words, it's not the world they live in that's limited; it's the poverty of their maps that keeps them suffering and in pain.It follows, then, that it's often much more productive—and a lot easier—to change the map someone has been using rather than the territory in which the person is functioning. The therapists we modeled were showing us this approach in their behavior.Despite the fact that some people, usually psychotherapists, believe change is only possible with a lot of time and effort—and then only if the client isn't resistant—hypnosis, the effective therapists, and those people who "just changed" showed us that change could be a lot quicker and easier. The tools to do this were not available at the time, so I had to create them. Through NLP, I have been able to develop learnable principles, processes, and techniques that make change systematic and easy.As I pointed out in Volume I of The Structure of Magic, perception and experience are active, rather than passive, processes. We all create our subjective experience out of the "stuff' of the external world. One of the reasons that we don't all end up with the same model is that our experiencing is governed by certain restrictions or constraints: the constraints of our individual nervous systems (neurological constraints), the societies in which we function (social constraints), and our unique personal histories (personal constraints).The NLP model we advanced at the time to explain this process was simplified, but it's held up remarkably well over the years. Basically, the model suggested that we each use our five senses slightly differently from each other to process incoming information. The models we make depend on which senses we favor, what information we take in and how much we leave out, and how we interpret whatever does get through. To summarize briefly:Neurological constraints. We receive information about the world through five sensory input channels—visual, auditory, kinesthetic (feelings), smell (olfactory), and taste (gustatory). Rather than each sense being given equal weight with every other sense, each of us favors one or two over the others. Of course, we know there's considerable overlap in the parts of the brain responsible for processing our senses, but one or the other usually dominates in experience. This is known as your sensory preference or preferred sensory system.Social restraints. As members of a particular society, we are subject to a number of mutually agreed-upon filters, the most significant of which is the language we are born to speak.The more specific our language is, and the more distinctions we can make, the richer our experience will be. This concept is central to the practice of Neuro-Iinguistic Programming and hypnosis. Words are power, and the language patterns you will learn from this book will help harness this power for yourself and for others.Individual constraints. As its name suggests, the third category of constraints develops out of our personal experience. We are each born into a particular set of circumstances, and as we grow up we encounter an increasing number of experiences, which in turn give rise to unique likes and dislikes, habits, rules, beliefs, and values. The maps we create from these can become rich and useful, or limited and destructive, and unless we understand how we create our subjective world, we will continue to live in confusion and pain.People don't make themselves miserable out of choice, even though it sometimes looks that way. NLP doesn't see people as bad, crazy, or sick. Our viewpoint is that they are operating out of an impoverished map, limited in the number of choices they have. To put it another way, they mistake the model for reality. This is what we mean when we say: The map is not the territory.The richness and poverty of our maps are created by three filtering mechanisms: deletion, distortion, and generalization. These are all processes we need to carry out to manage the information that is coming at us so we are not overwhelmed. Problems occur when the wrong information is deleted, distorted, or generalized, creating patterns that either don't support our well-being or actively diminish it.Deletion. Deletion occurs when we pay attention to certain parts of our experience at the expense of others, which we do naturally. Think about being in a crowded room, talking to a friend. You automatically screen out the buzz of other people's conversation...-until you hear your name spoken by someone on the other side of the room.Deletion is a necessary and useful mechanism for making sure your world is manageable in size, but in certain circumstances it can create pain and suffering. For example, I've never met a depressed person who can remember a time when he was really happy. As far as depressives are concerned, they've always been unhappy. Equally, sufferers of chronic pain often don't notice those times when their pain is reduced or nonexistent. Certain people believe the world is a hostile place and simply fail to notice how many people act in a caring or supportive way.Distortion. Distortion is a quality that all creative people have in abundance. We need to be able to shift the meaning of—to distort—present reality to be able to create something new. (Great writers and artists are experts in distortion.) However, as pattern-making beings, we are equally inclined to distort reality in ways that cause us pain and distress.Some years ago I was in a restaurant, listening to a couple at the next table having a fight. The man said something really nice—obviously wanting to make peace with his partner—and she snapped back: "Oh, you're just saying that to make me feel better!"Of course he was trying to make her feel better—nothing wrong with that, as far as I could see. But she distorted into a hostile act his attempt to makepeace. Sol leaned over and said: "Yeah, he's really bad that way. Imagine wanting to make the woman he loves feel good." For a moment, they were both stunned. Then they laughed and started to talk to each other in a much nicer way.Generalization. The third mechanism is generalization—the process by which a person takes one or two experiences and decides that this is the way all things are meant to be, all the time.Generalization is useful as a tool in learning. If we cut ourselves when we are careless with a sharp implement, we generalize to the extent that we believe "all" sharp instruments are capable of injuring us, so we treat them with respect. We have learned over many hundreds of thousands of years to stay alive by applying generalization.Generalization, as has already been mentioned, is the mechanism by which people all over the planet know how to open doors, simply because they've generalized information out of one or two formative experiences, but generalization is also at the root of many problems. When I was still at school, teachers believed we left-handers should be forced to write with our right hands. Their method of instruction was to patrol our desks and whack us with rulers when they found us writing with the "wrong" hand.Later, I got to do more things my way. As a person who was still left-handed, I reversed all the doors in my house to make things easier for myself. Everywhere else, the front door opened inward. Mine opened outward; it just felt better that way.However, friends of mine would come along, try to get in, then say, "Hey, your door's jammed." I'd come along, open it the other way, and then next time they came along, the same thing would happen. Their motor programs just couldn't cope with an exception to their generalization about the way doors "should" be.Generalization can have serious consequences on people's lives when they fail to undo generalizations that no longer work. Someone who was mistreated as a child may decide that all men (or women) or all authority figures are to be feared and disliked. A person who experiences several failed relationships may decide that love is for losers and withdraw into a lonely existence. Sexual dysfunction among some men persists because they believe a single incident will necessarily apply to all physical encounters.Basically, generalization occurs when someone applies a single rule to all situations that resemble the one in which the original rule was formulated. The context has been altered from "one" to "all," from "sometimes" to "always."Understanding this mechanism gives us insight into much behavior that otherwise seems strange or even bizarre. If we recognize that the rule makes sense in the appropriate context, we can start to help people restore the behavior to the situation or situations in which it originated, or help to create new and more appropriate behaviors. Based on this NLP approach, we can say, at some level, that all behavior has positive intent.Freedom can only start to come when we restore information to an impoverished map. Once we begin to explore how each individual reality is constructed, we open ourselves and others to a whole range of options and opportunities. Rather than trying to take away people's discomfort or unwanted responses—to make people "not have" depression or anxiety or an eating disorder— we create new choices for them in the belief that, when they have more and better choices than before, they will make them on a more consistent basis.Exercise: Identifying Your Sensory PreferencesYou can do this exercise with a partner or by yourself. If you are alone, it helps greatly to speak out loud, possibly into a voice recorder so you can review your experiences later.1.	Imagine as clearly as you can a walk along a beach. It can be a beach you know or an entirely imaginary one. Your goal is to describe in as much detail as you can the experience, cycling through each of your five senses. First, describe everything you see—the color of the sky and the ocean, the seagulls in the air, the white foam flying into the air as waves crash against the black rocks, the colorful clothes of children playing in the sand, and so on. Then move to another sense—hearing, for example—and describe everything you can hear, from the sound of your feet on the beach to a ship's horn in the distance. Continue until you have completed your description in all five senses.2.	Now, review your description and notice whether it was easier to make pictures, hear sounds, or feel sensations, such as the temperature of the air against the skin. Was it easy to imagine the smell of salt in the air, or the taste of a hot dog bought from an oceanfront stand? One of these senses will dominate. This is your sensory preference.Note: Having a preference for one sensory modality does not mean you do not use the other senses, or that you use your preferred modality in all situations. We all tend to use all senses in processing information, but some are used to a greater or lesser degree.